## Introduction

Whether exploring variation at the single cell, tissue, or population level, a key challenge is separating molecular driver from passenger effects. Drivers may be defined as molecular factors that are necessary to observe the variation; this causal role can be important as these factors can be manipulated and further studied to understand the sources of this variation. By contrast, passenger effects are the consequences of the variation in upstream drivers. While passengers may be important for further molecular variation, or phenotypic consequences of molecular variation, this is not ensured by their variation itself. In many cases disruption of passenger factors has little or no effect.

A variety of strategies have been employed to explore and attempt to identify the drivers of molecular variation in biological systems. The simplest and most widespread is perhaps gene set enrichment analysis, wherein prior knowledge is used to assemble groups of genes or other molecular factors that are known to be affected by some upstream driver. A high degree of overlap is then taken as evidence implicating that driver in the observed process. Prior knowledge in the form of graphs for gene-gene effects can be used, with or without graph-based enrichment approaches. For simply exploring variation, dimensionality reduction schemes, such as principal components analysis, t-SNE, or UMAP can help to organize variation into simplified patterns across the data.

Some consistent challenges exist in each of the existing methods for exploring variation. First, those that are reliant on prior knowledge-defined molecular networks or gene sets necessarily suffer from incomplete and biased coverage. While analysis based solely on the measurements at hand prevents prior knowledge bias, observational measurements without defined interventions are insufficient to determine the directionality of molecular networks. It is also not possible to disentangle the contributory factors to gene-gene correlation strengths from observational measurements. For example, two genes might be highly correlated due to strong regulatory influence, one overwhelming source of variation relative to others, or the strong influence of a common upstream regulator. The common solution to each of these problems is a reliable, directed, quantitative estimate of gene-gene influences.

We begin by extending recent work using data-driven dynamical systems as an interpretable model in perturbation biology experiments. We identify that, in the absence of dynamic measurements, this type of model can be simplified into its steady-state limit, and then further into an iterative expectation-maximization matrix solving framework. This extension allows us to scale this interpretable model to genome-scale perturbation measurements and solve for the solution graph of gene-gene, signed and directed interaction effects. While perturbation effects are context dependent between cell lines, we show that a common network of gene-gene effects can be derived. Finally, we use this resulting graph to trace molecular variation through the interaction effect network. We anticipate this variance flux analysis approach will be helpful for identifying the drivers of variation in biological systems. 
